Okay, you've written some other fancy which we'll talk about, but the thing we want to
talk about first, which is probably what we'll make the main programs on, is the fuzzy stuff,
is that appropriate?
Could you give us some background about it?
I know H.B.
Piper wrote about the fuzzies first of all, and how is it that other people are now writing
about it, that sort of thing?
What's the flow of how that worked, and then how did you get interested in writing fuzzy
material?
Well, Mr. Piper died in 1966, a suicide, which was a very tragic thing, and he left a considerable
literary estate.
He had been writing rather successfully for a long time.
There was sort of a hiatus there for a number of years, until one of his friends, I believe
had aced to purchase his literary estate, all the rights and all of his books and short
stories and everything, which they did.
And they reissued little fuzzy and fuzzy sapiens in a single volume under the fuzzy papers,
and it was very successful.
It had a built-in market of people who remembered the books, and so they decided that they wanted
another book, so they turned to Mr. William Tuning, who wrote a third book, Fuzzy Bones,
which I enjoyed very much.
I based a great deal of the background of my book on the substructure that he had created
for their historical background.
And then, I believe it was Susan Allison, who was then the head science fiction editor
at ACE, decided that they wanted a book from the viewpoint of the little aliens.
Well, my editor had just bought paperback rights to my first two double-day books, and
she was in the process of putting them into production for ACE, and she had had a great
deal of back-and-forth conversation with my agent, who is still black-staggered at how
fast I am.
And so one day the phone rang, that dear phone.
It was Susan Allison.
She said, Would you be interested in writing a book to continue H.B.
Piper's Fuzzy Series?
Are you familiar with mine?
I said, Yes, I've got my teeth on them.
And she said, Well, would you be interested?
We want one from the viewpoint of the aliens.
And she said, I shouldn't say this, but we were kicking it around the office and trying
to figure who was extremely fast and partly alien, and naturally we thought of you.
Well, I was flat, you know, because I am both.
So I said, Well, I'll tell you what, I will reread the books, and then I will write whatever
feels comfortable so that I know how well I fit into a fuzzy skin, and you will be able
to tell how well you like what I do.
And then we'll go from there.
So this was in early February.
So I sat down, and it's a very funny thing.
Becoming an alien is not all that difficult, but you have to have been a very peculiar
child to be able to do it well.
So I remembered when I was two feet tall.
I can remember back before I was two years old.
I remembered how the world is full of shoes and kneecaps.
You know, everything is tremendous.
Shrubs or trees and trees are just something up there like clouds.
So I shrunk myself down to two feet tall and put myself on a world where everything thought
I was delicious and went from there.
Because the treatment of the fuzzies in both paper and cuning books is rather peripheral
to the human story, and the fuzzies are given rather short shrift as sort of cutesy poo
creatures.
Okay, Mr. Tuning had set up that they had survived on this totally inimical planet for
1,200 years.
So little helpless big eyed cutesy poos don't survive for 1,200 years.
You've got to have pretty bright, gritty little cats, or they're not going to make it.
Well, I had some awfully neat questions to answer that had been set up in the other books
and had never been addressed in those books.
Why did they speak in ultrasonics?
Why being obviously rational creatures capable of great affection were they sexually promiscuous?
Oh, there were any number of questions that I had to answer.
It was so funny because as I went, I just turned, okay, this is what they are.
And I turn around and look when this is obviously the reason they were that way.
They were sexually promiscuous, for instance, because when their spaceship crashed, a complement
of only some 400 were aboard.
And some half of those were subsequently killed in an earthquake.
So you had a gene pool shared among something around 150 or 200 individuals.
You had to spread your genetic heritage around.
And so this would be a natural outgrowth of assigned breeding as long as they were in
the original valley.
And then when they went out, they retained this imperative from their leaders, you must
do this for racial survival.
There were any number of things like that.
Anyhow, they loved what I did.
I loved what I did.
I wrote that book, 100,000 words in six weeks.
I sat on a wicker stool, which is now permanently imprinted on my
derriere.
My husband would come in, he would have left me sitting on the stool that morning.
He'd come in that evening and say, you haven't eaten, have you?
I say, eaten?
What's eaten?
But it was a lot of fun.
Of course it took them six months to produce my contract.
But it took a long to get the money to.
Much longer.
Are there going to be more coming from you?
I really don't know.
In the middle of all this, one of the hitches with the contract was the fact that Berkeley
bought Ace.
And this queried all sorts of deals.
They had projected 100,000 printing with a $50,000 ad campaign behind it.
Well there had been a couple of good full page ads, one in Locust, one in Publishers
Weekly, a few around different places.
They gave it a better start than it would have had.
But then when the title passed to Berkeley, they cut the printing to $55,000 and they
saw it off the ad campaign, right in its tracks.
And now they are saying, the book has only been out since October, you understand.
It was on the Locust trade paperback bestseller list for two months in succession.
But when I asked my editor up there if they would be interested in a proposal for another,
she said, well I would.
But the powers that they are making, well this hasn't done very well, no, as she said.
They don't care that it's their fault that it hasn't sold millions, they didn't print
enough in the first place.
And she said, we're just going to have to wait and see how the mass market edition
does and that will be out in September.
So just keep your fingers crossed that the mass market, I just wouldn't mind it all
writing another one.
You'd rather enjoy the...
I did.
They're nice little people.
They really are.
They're full.
Yeah.
The cover is one of the better covers, I think they were gorgeous.
Did you have any input on that or were you just pleasantly surprised?
No, but I knew it was going to be beautiful because Mike Whalen had done the covers for
the Piper books and for the tuning book.
And so I knew what he could do.
It was funny when the Ace Trade catalog came out last fall.
Golden Dream was the lead book.
It had a double page color spread.
But this had been such a hurry up project that Mike had not yet completed the cover
painting and they had to fake the cover painting and use it back off one of the old books for
it, which is sort of funny.
If I remember right, this is just a trivia thing.
I think when they went out the fuzzy pages, they had a man kneeling down with a gun and
some fuzzy.
That was H.B. Piper, as I understand it.
Yeah, I think it was supposed to be.
That's what he looked like.
I was always struck by that.
I always had the feeling that H.B. Piper modeled Jack Holloway, who was the discoverer of the
fuzzies on himself.
It just felt that way.
Yeah.
Okay, let's talk about what else you've done.
If you could give us titles and kind of what genre and what your literary aim is when you're writing them.
Okay, well let me give you titles first because that's sort of a long project by itself.
All right.
Okay, in 1979, Double Day published How the Gods Wove in Curana.
Better spell that.
K-Y-R-A-N-N-O-N.
Somebody said, your rule is I take it that there must be one unpronounceable word in every title.
And I hadn't realized that, so I'm trying to do better.
In 80, Double Day brought out The Seekers of Charanun, which is S-H-A-R-N-U-H-N.
81 brought Soul Singer of Ternos, T-Y-R-N-O-S from Athenaeum.
82 busted loose like a pot of popcorn.
Warlock's gift came from Double Day in the spring.
Paperback reprints from Ace of How the Gods Wove in Seekers of Charanun came out that spring.
Runes of the Liar came out from Athenaeum that fall.
And Golden's L-Y-R-E.
And Golden Dream of Fuzzy Odyssey came out that fall.
So it sort of just grabbed you up like a tornado and carried you away spinning.
I write a great many other things besides science fiction and fantasy.
I read eclectically and always have.
In Britain Westerns, I have two Westerns out to market.
And two more in various stages of disarray, which I will finish if and when I sell the first two.
I've written an occult horror novel.
I have written a very strange suspense novel.
I've written a peculiar little novel about a child who visualized an imaginary pet.
And thereby created a tulpa, which is something that is not too well known in the West.
It's a Tibetan.
Actually, it's a middle exercise in which you visualize something so concretely that other people can see it.
According to my sources, an English woman in the middle of the 1800s created a tulpa.
It traveled with her and innkeepers would serve it meals even though it couldn't eat them.
But tulpa have a very strange quirk.
They tend to get nastier and nastier.
I mean, you can just visualize them as sweet as all get-out.
But somewhere down the line, if they stick around, they get nasty and you have to un-make them.
But of course, this was a small child.
She was six years old and she didn't do it according to the rules because she was psychically talented and she just did it.
And when Willoughby got nasty, she couldn't un-make it.
And it takes her up to the point at which she's 26 years old and is suddenly and violently motivated,
almost on a totally primitive level to un-make Willoughby, which she did.
He attacked her mother.
And this is a fun book that I haven't been able to get my agent to send out.
For some reason, Willoughby bothers her and she never has sent it out to an editor.
And I just keep champing at my bits and gnawing on my stubby fingernails.
But all crazy.
I just finished a book in which I combined an Onondaga warrior woman and dream magician with a 14th century adept,
who has set a trans-dimensional trap in the Iroquois forest for his own purposes.
And he pulls her across into a slightly time and space different but analogous England.
And that was a lot of fun.
I'm a language freak.
I learned a lot of Onondaga.
It doesn't have to be language.
It's that anybody understands you understand.
But Two Moons and the Black Tower.
What's that when I send it off to my agent and I call her and I said,
it's on its way.
I don't know if it's saleable, but even if not, it has been worth every minute of it.
I had just had a ball right in.
That's the reason I do it, you know.
It's so much fun.
And I never know when I start a book what's going to happen any more than you do.
Do you know at least what genre it's going to be?
Not always.
Now when I do a Western, I mean you have to put yourself in a Western mood to do a Western.
I get more blood thirsty when I'm doing a Western.
But sometimes, well when my agent calls me and said,
look, if you write another fantasy, I can sell it.
Well, and if I'm particularly hungry that then I'll sit down and start a fantasy.
But ordinarily, I just sort of let them go with the flow and see what comes out.
You mentioned you've written, if you've, you've written Westerns,
science fiction, fantasy, an occult novel.
Do you, are you writing, let's say, fantasy and science fiction now because it sells better?
Or do you just write what you damn well please?
I love it.
I've always loved it ever since I was a girl.
Hit my first one when I was 15 and never have looked back.
Did you grow up in a small town farm, at least?
I grew up on a farm near Nacogdoches.
And Nacogdoches at that time was somewhere around 5,000.
Had the world's worst paperback distributor.
And one day on the newsstand popped up a merit's face in the abyss.
And I had a quarter in my pocket, which was not always the case.
Back then kids were even poorer than grown people.
Glommed on to it with cries of joy.
Took it home and read it with rockets going off in my head.
Wow, this is mine.
I can read it as many times as I want to.
And nothing hit the stands that I didn't manage by hooker, by crook or chicken money or something to get from their own.
But of course I read everything else all along.
I read a lot of archaeology.
I read a lot of mythology and psychiatry and psychology and anthropology and everything you think of.
I love history.
I love obscure history.
I like neat things like Louis Spence's The History of Atlantis.
I thought about forming a club of the people who have read The History of Atlantis.
I found five so far.
It sort of sorts out the sheep from the goats, you know, and unusual for a while.
When you were growing up then you grew up on a farm.
Were you a dreamer?
I mean I realized you had to work hard too.
Were you kind of a dreamer while you were working, thinking about it?
Oh, it's the best thing.
I was a poet of course when I was on the farm.
And we went into the dirt, well we were dirt farmers to start with.
The biggest old mule you ever saw taught me how to plow.
The mules are the brightest people you will ever meet.
They have very few distractions.
And when I was 12 my dad started selling milk, grade C milk,
which meant I came in from school every evening and scrubbed milk cans that had
sat out for the side of the road full of milk until the truck came, had been taken to Houston,
emptied, not rinsed out, and brought back to be left on the side of the road the next day.
That's going to be deducted from my time in Hades if there's any justice at all.
And then when I was 17 we built a dairy barn.
And I mean we built a dairy barn with our own hands and went into the grade A dairy business.
And a McCormick Deering double unit milker works in perfect IMS.
I wrote 250 sonnets.
I do my best thinking when my hands are busy.
And I would milk and get stepped on and kicked and have cow tails stuck in my mouth.
And I'd go ride on riding sonnets in my head.
You have to be strange.
You understand it's necessary.
Besides which you know I can't think of anything better to take your mind off shoveling cow manure than riding sonnets.
It's just about as far as you can take your head from what your hands are doing.
This morning you were talking to us about the fact that you think that having written poetry really helped with your prose and your novels.
So would you recount that for the tape?
Oh yes. This is something that I tell people.
I talk to a lot of college classes and I belong to a group that has beginners in it.
And I tell them write poetry even if it's bad poetry because in poetry you don't have a novel's worth of elbow room.
You can't use 25 wrong words to get across an idea that two perfect words will give with punch you know with real impact.
Poetry takes the laziness out of it.
It makes you search for the proper word, the proper phrase, the exact construction that conveys what you want to give.
This is something sort of strange too. I never went to college.
I got out of high school and oh I thought my English teacher was just going to die and dissolve because I wouldn't go to college.
I had I think a 99 average for my entire senior year which was really not fair because I didn't work at it.
And some of the guys who really worked should have gotten better grades than I did.
But anyhow she said you're not going out to the dairy and stay there.
And I said well I'm going out to the dairy whether or not I stay there.
It just depends on what comes up the pike.
But I'm going to go out there and I'm going to do what I like to do and think what I like to think.
And learn what I like to learn and I'm not going to be programmed by some cotton picking professor.
I was a very opinionated 17 year old.
And so I did and I studied over the next 10 years.
I learned first of all I learned self-discipline.
Which is the most important thing a writer can learn.
Then I studied six languages.
I learned to read six languages.
All sorts ofologies.
Everything you can think of philosophy, philology, archeology, anthropology.
Just everything I could get my hands on.
And while I made $30 a month it didn't cost me anything to live.
So I spent $30 a month on books.
And you could buy a whale of a lot of books back in 1947 for $30.
And we subscribed.
My mother always had magazines coming.
All kinds of magazines from Atlantic Monthly to Cosmopolitan.
Which at that time was a literate magazine.
And so we had a great deal of input.
And then of course my parents were both college educated.
They were both people with the guts to give up a good job and throw their hats over the windmill
and go out and just make it or break it on a dirt farm.
Which is neat though that nearly killed them when I did the same thing.
Somehow the perspectives changed between $30 and $50.
But I got a fantastic education.
I admit there were holes in it.
I never had too much grounding in mathematics.
Though I like mathematics.
Or lab sciences.
In fact I never took biology because that year they offered Latin for the first time.
And I was going to have Latin or die.
And so I didn't get biology.
But really that's a lot of fun because now I'm researching recombinant DNA in plant.
Alteration.
And it's just new worlds.
It's like fantasy itself.
So I'm having a wonderful time with it.
I know you live on a farm now.
Could you kind of go through a typical day?
Let's not say one where you're writing a fuzzy book and sitting in your city.
No.
But what's a typical day for you?
How do you work in the writing?
Well, my husband and I get up at six.
He has to go to town and open up his service station.
So I get up and fix breakfast for him at six.
And at eight fifteen comes the postman.
So I'm standing there and watching dishes.
Or I'm out there milking the cow.
And I'm listening for the postman.
You know when Snoopy is a vulture.
When he's on top of his doghouse being a vulture.
That's the way I am with the postman.
I milked one of the cows and turned the five calves in on her and her partner.
And ten feed the goats and feed the cats and feed the dogs.
And then I get the mail and look through.
And I got such interesting mail.
A lot of days I begin my real work.
Of course, in among this, I usually try to sweep the porch and straighten the stacks.
I've discovered you don't have to clean your living room if you keep your stacks straight.
So I straighten the stacks.
Then I hit the typewriter about nine o'clock usually.
And I may answer six letters before I start writing.
But then I will usually write depending on what I am engaged in from three to seven hours.
I can write a pretty fair size short story in two and a half, three hours.
But if I'm working on a book then it's really hot.
Well I'll go right on through the three thirty four o'clock sometime.
And I'm one of these lucky people.
I don't have to eat.
I don't need to eat.
So I don't get hungry.
I don't have to interrupt myself.
Well, and about three thirty or four though the goat starts yelling at the pin.
I don't know why she yells at four o'clock.
But she usually does and that wakes me up.
And I think, you know, I don't know whether I can get my old bones up from here or not.
I'd better try and see, you know, among much creaking and groaning.
I've hoist myself off the stool and straighten out and uncrink back.
And so that's then when I go out and oh I may dig in my garden or take a walk up our little road.
I walk in the woods when it's not deer season.
I have not much ambition to wind up as a head on somebody's wall.
But we have a pretty nice woods up from us.
So I may take a walk and get the kinks out of my bones.
And time to get back.
It's time to lick the cat all over again and milk the cows and put the calves on.
Feed the goats and all that good stuff.
And then it's time to cook supper for Papa.
And he gets home about six thirty.
And so we pretty well are ready to pack it in there.
And we sit there very quietly and trade tidbits about our days.
We usually turn on the television but it's just for...
We're used to having children around.
My husband had two children when we married.
And when the last one left it just got so quiet.
So we need some background noise.
But sometimes we watch and sometimes we don't.
But it's...
Oh it would bore young people to death our lifestyle would.
But we've been places and we've done things.
And we've thrown our hats over the windmill two or three times.
So we're pretty well ready to sit down and let our bones ache in peace.
That's nice.
This is really kind of a dirty question.
I guess would you like to be in a situation you're in some urban environment.
You don't have to milk the cows.
You can just sit there and ride on there.
Do you think this is an integral part of you?
I am a peasant to my toenails.
I am not happy.
I have lived in town periodically.
And I've been miserable every minute.
Oh I had to live in Houston for sixteen months.
I thought I'd die.
In fact I think I would have died if we hadn't left.
We've always had a little plot of ground.
Maybe not but two acres but something.
We've always had some kind of livestock.
When spring comes if I can't get my hands at the dirt and make a garden.
You just better buy a straight jacket and call the men in the white coats.
Because I'm ready to go off.
I do my best writing thinking in the garden.
Or even milking the cow.
The old head just keeps rolling right along.
Do you have any questions?
No?
Wow.
I think we've got a pretty little cover here.
I guess I should ask just so when we write the introduction.
The other books that you've written are by and large fantasy.
By and large fantasy.
Yeah, by and large fantasy.
Yes.
Romantic fantasy, adventure fantasy.
It's really more toward heroic fantasy.
Though not in the sword and sorcery type of thing.
These are more people who are heroic.
Not through physical strength or anything like that.
But because of the press of circumstance and integrity.
I try to write about the way people can be and often are.
Realism is fine.
I mean there's a place for that.
But I have never seen that the cause of human enlightenment has been forwarded too much by depicting the absolute worst aspects of human nature.
People can be noble.
They can be courageous.
And they very often are.
So why not write about it?
When you do research, you're talking about doing a thing about recombinant DNA and all the oligies that you're interested in.
Do you by and large depend on your own resources or does Nakadoshis have a library which is helpful in your research?
The university library there.
I have two very good friends who work there.
I don't get into Nakadoshis too terribly often.
It's a 60 mile round trip.
I do get in once a week to wash and get groceries and that sort of thing.
But usually I have a shucklet and have to get all this done before it goes out.
But these two friends, when I have something that I really need, they will look it up.
They'll either photocopy it or check it out for me.
And that's really a help because I can not even pop out of one of their houses.
And not have to park and walk at our university.
The parking problem is something and you have to walk about a mile to get where you go.
The old knees are just not real good at that anymore.
But I have a tremendous library on myself.
And I keep adding to it all the time.
I don't think a tornado could blow my house away.
It's so heavy with books.
So really ordinarily I can find almost anything I want there.
Now this DNA project, I have a friend in Houston who is a science fiction writer.
Her husband is an engineer at NASA.
And of course they have access to tremendous technical libraries.
And she Xeroxed me a great deal of stuff on the recombinant DNA.
Did you realize something?
As far as we can find, there has been no work done on the sub-cellular phenomenon
that takes place when a plant goes dormant.
There's any amount of stuff on what it looks like, you know, what the plant does.
But what do the mitochondria do?
What happens to the cytoplasm?
What differences are there on the sub-molecular level when a plant goes dormant?
And we can't find anything.
There may be something.
But I have not been able to find it.
My friend at SFA library checked out a stack of books half as long as I am.
And there was nothing in there.
And then the lady down in Houston couldn't find anything there either.
So very interesting.
So you stumbled across things like that?
Yeah.
Yeah, a lot of things.
Do you wish you started writing, let's say, writing towards being published at an earlier age?
You know, I have given that a lot of thought.
It's a very rough road, I hope.
But I have come to the conclusion that people who have a great deal of success, very young,
quite often don't keep pushing themselves to refine their technique,
get better and better and better so that by golly you are so good they can't turn you down.
You know, this is really a good head of steam to have behind you.
Okay, I've been rejected for 20 years.
I'm not going to quit.
I'm going to get so good there's no way they can keep turning me down.
And besides which, you know, when you've lived 40 years, you know, a lot of things you didn't know when you lived 25 years.
You understand not only what people do, but how they feel under different circumstances when a husband comes home and has lost his job.
You not only know how he acts, you know how he and his wife feel about it.
And this is something that I think causes a great deal of modern non-genre fiction to be superficial.
People are writing about it who have never stood in those shoes and who don't really understand what it does to your guts to have a child get deathly ill at two o'clock in the morning.
You know, all this sort of thing to have a husband almost killed by a tractor, which I did 30 miles out in the country.
With the wounds so close to the artery that you could see the artery pulsing.
And you had to get him in the truck and get him to the hospital and not panic.
Oh, and be so proud of my sons who were something like 15 and 17, I guess at the time.
Never turn their steadiest rocks.
Got the cot mattress in the van.
Got their daddy in the van.
While I was calling the hospital, got him in there and got him up there and nobody quivered.
We waited through all the surgery and everything.
Got home that night and you talk about three people sitting and shaking for about three hours.
But while the chips were down, it was really a neat thing.
But now this is something that you have lived through when you're 25 years old or even 30 some night.
And the longer you live, the more you have to write about.
You got to live it to write it.
It's your hand.
Okay.
Any other questions?
You read all my questions out here.
I didn't need to say a thing.
We really appreciate it.
I love enjoying it.
As you can doubt, let's tell, I love to talk.
We love to listen.
Most of my ancestors are Irish.
Don't do it yet, David.
It's mayhem, right?
Mayhem.
Art of mayhem.
Okay.
I just want to tell myself that because I'll call it mayhem if I don't.